I'm the last person to claim that my
YouTube content in any way reflects the
desires or interests of my eyes however
i do get intelligent questions from my
supporters on patreon people who pay the
one dollar a month to keep a valid CL
Broadcasting Corporation rolling thank
you I can genuinely say if it wasn't for
200 people giving the two hundred
dollars this video right now would not
be happening um and if you join patreon
you get to talk to me and I reply via to
hear back from me the only way to do
that now because I've closed down the
comments on this channel so I've got a
question coming in here I've had a
couple of really good philosophical
questions coming in lately it opens by
asking but framing the question in terms
of the relationship between moral
responsibility and work I'll come back
to that so quote the guy writing is me
it's named McGregor I just use first
names and he gives that as his first
name so McGregor showed it to you quote
with regard to the problems of poverty
for example you seem to be engaged at
direct approach but having immerse
yourself in a language and culture in
order to understand the roots of poverty
in that particular culture and helping
to alleviate some of the problems
directly by for example delivering food
ly two right hands on humanitarian work
etc likewise with veganism you advocate
for a direct approach of building a
political movement rather than a passive
approach is simply choosing to be vegan
close quote so interesting he is drawing
a link between my approach to
humanitarian work humanitarian research
etc in the past and my current approach
to the future of vegan activist
interesting intelligent observation I
think you can draw some dotted lines
between the two but I think they're much
more different than they are similar
actually I think it's really a contrast
in my life the way I now talk about
engagement veganism and how I engage
with humanitarian were in research in
the Amana tarian sector too by the way
in Laos Cambodia Thailand I tried to get
involved in Myanmar never could for
years trying to volunteer in the refugee
camps on the Myanmar border by the way
never worked out you spend a lot more
time seeking and applying for
that kind of work than you do actually
doing it unless you have the money in
the bank to start your own foundation to
be your own CEO of a charity on a tiny
scale um alright continuing here quote
so my question is do you think that more
passive approaches satisfy our
responsibilities for example somebody
has a particular career may decide that
they can do more good by living frugally
and donating money to the right causes
do you think that this is right ? should
somebody who's starting from the ground
up consider this kind of stretch
strategy which charities in particular
do you think of the highest cost benefit
ratio okay so this is an interesting
question to me because it approaches
these problems that we all face all of
us has vegan sites all of us ask
ourselves every day what kind of you
make the world a better place whether
you think of that in terms of the future
of the vegan movement or you think of it
in terms of helping particular animals
or working with in particular
institutions whatever your perspective
on maybe we ask ourselves short term and
long term tactically and strategically
what can I do right and he is framing
this in terms of the relationship
between moral responsibility and work
and I actually do not see it that way
okay so the next part was questioned he
raises this issue of that when I was
interested in poverty when I was dressed
in alleviating poverty in Laos or in
Cambodia I went there I lived there I
learned the language I studied the
history the politics the culture you
know a lot of stuff you learn from books
you're not going to learn by talking to
a farmer face-to-face but in the other
hand what you learn from the books then
that enrich a--'s that conversation of
the farmer you get a lot more out of
those interactions because you have the
scholarly background and soon as I was
studying ancient history as well as
modern history and yeah when I was
talking to farmers I was getting a lot
more out of it than some other guy who
may be with the American Peace Corps who
just got off the airplane was no
connection to the language history
politics said okay however none of that
fits into this framework of moral
responsibility and work it doesn't even
fit into the framework of outcomes you
ask to go in the last sentence here in
terms of cost-benefit ratio right
cost-benefit ratio
you can just have an airplane fly over
Laos and dump food on them dump sacks of
rice on you can just have an airplane
favorite you can dump money on them you
can drop gold coins out of an airplane
not even land not even slow down and
poor people will get less poor right you
can do outcome evaluation research right
if those are the only things that matter
you can do fly by drive by charity with
zero engagement personally like in terms
of what I've just been describing my
engage place and zero engagement
institutionally you can remain
completely alien and in many many cases
there may be an argument that that's the
most effective if the only thing that
matters is taking a sack of rice and
getting into the hands of starving
people fly by a charity drive by
anthropologie you know car window
engagement with local people maybe
that's going to win if you're just
thinking about in terms of what we
discharging your moral responsibility
and in terms of outcomes measurable
outcome evaluation right for me the
ultimate product that I question and
that I encourage you the viewer to
question when you look in the mirror
when you look at what you did with the
last five years life and what you do it
next let's join the ultimate product is
not the sack of rice that you're handing
out the product is you the question is
who do you want to be who are you going
to become and for a period of my life I
was fashioning myself step by step to be
a scholar and I guess a human rights
activist and a humanitarian agent
humanitarian worker who had a really
meaningful engagement with reality in
rural laos in modern cambodia both urban
and rural right and you get to see those
differences i mean it's not just
speaking the language and it's not just
hearing the language how you listen to
the people it's how you understand what
they're leaving unsaid what it is
they're not comfortable admitting to you
sensitivities for maybe what the real
problem is you can go into a
poverty-stricken village and they're
telling you about every problem
except the real problem that's that's
breathing down the next that they're
most terrified of that they can't admit
to an outsider and if you stick around
you know how to write the ask the right
questions you notice your shut up and
listen when it's time to be someone you
can figure out what that is right i mean
cultural sensitivity is not an end in
itself right cultural sensitivity is a
research tool ultimately and research is
not in itself ultimately we do research
not to understand the world but to
change it no doubt right but I was
becoming another person I was educating
myself I was training myself I was
preparing myself to play a much more
effective role than for example and one
of my enemies in Laos I wrote a report
scathing scathing series of reports
dealing with sexual abuse of poverty
stricken and teenagers in small towns
that experience seasonal starvation when
visited that town 2 by the way the
people there were not ethnically loud
they were akka fascinating case study I
can give the the links below this video
I were two articles in that as ever call
and those articles got picked up by the
press in Europe it went all over the
world it was a big scandal and I really
was a crucial part of making it a big
scandal of shining a spotlight on
exactly what these charities were doing
one of them was a Christian charity
getting teenage girls pregnant and and
so on and questions of statutory rape
the girls are underage and even when
it's not statutory rape if these people
are starving and dependent on you in
terms of your role as an officer and a
charity and you're literally providing
aid to people who are still poor enough
for their experiencing seasonal
starvation and so on isn't there an
abuse of power dynamic here that you
know between the foot of this way isn't
this on humanitarian what's going on in
situation so I remember when I was there
that agency they were deeply embarrassed
by the articles I wrote so they fired
the guy who was in charge the agency
they didn't fire they reassigned him to
another office elsewhere and they
installed a new guy as the head of the
agency and he was a white Frenchman
spoke French the first language he spoke
a little bit of English he spoke zero
lotion 0 ty had no ability in any local
language and he had just been reassigned
from his prestige posting
in the Darfur region of Sudan so those
of you who are old enough to remember
for years and years that area of Sudan
was always in the newspapers I think not
so much in the last couple of years as
an area of civil role war and looting
and atrocities and human rights
violations for many years in a row the
Darfur region of Sudan Sudan is the
country the news this guy just been
doing humanitarian work in Sudan in
Africa hey he's reassigned from Africa
to Laos which is in Southeast Asia
zerocool appreciation for the culture
zero appreciation for political history
zero engagement issues and look I'm not
going to tell you did a bad job I'm sure
he did a better job than the guy who was
there before him who were what who you
were placed but yeah no you know what
actually I would like to tell you that
he did a bad job actually i feel i do
have precisely does information of what
that situation was and his role in it
and that scandal and how he tried to
cover it up and the lies he spread no
actually there are several really
important ways you can say you did do a
bad job he could have done the morally
right thing and you chose to do the
immoral thing so yeah but my judgments
are immaterial the point is i did not
want to play that role i did not want to
be a technical expert who was an
outsider which is plenty of in the
humanitarian game there guys were they
come in all they know although is water
quality and they show up and they're
going to work in some poverty-stricken
village and help them improve the
quality the dream water that's all they
do they don't speak the language there
anything with the politics that are that
was not the role i was looking to play
the expertise i wanted well we did what
I wanted was not to bring in technical
expertise from Canada and sell it to the
lao people at bargain-basement prices
what I wanted precisely was to gain
expertise in Laos in the lao people in
their politics history language culture
etc and in that way to have a meaningful
engagement okay so the point is here
from my perspective
there's a totally separate question from
moral responsibility from the nature of
work from cost-benefit ratios analysis
of outcomes and charity and my point is
here if you're gauging if you are
engaging in humanitarian work if you're
engaging in political work political
lobbying political process try to change
the world the ultimate product is you
you can't control the other outcomes you
can do your best but what you have to
worry about is are you going to end up
like Gary Yourofsky are you going to end
up a ranting raving world hating was
were misanthropic you know in his own
terms he says he drove himself crazy he
went crazy and fluid is that what's
going to happen to you are you going to
get end up as a kind of technical expert
who just works in a narrow but deep area
of expertise there's no meaningful
engagement with the culture and politics
around you or do you want to become for
want of a better word a kind of
Renaissance man that's a term I never
here anymore someone who has a
meaningful engagement under all these
different categories and who can not
only do good but in a sense can really
avoid doing harm because of having that
profound meaningful engagement with
politics of the place and that's a
choice you don't just make once in your
life I think it's a choice most of us
have to make again and again and again
and the answer is not always going to be
yes so again keeping it all the way real
when I lived in Hong Kong I had to make
that choice and no I did not anyway want
to commit to the culture politics
history etc of hong kong in hong kong i
was happy to just be an outside i did
think about i did do enough research to
really make that decision I was an
outsider I was going to remain an
outsider for me Hong Kong was just a
place that I lived in between one
airplane ticket and another and now
living in Doha it's a very very painful
decision we make literally today just a
couple of hours ago today I met with a
humanitarian charity here that would
like to recur
me I don't think they can pay me a dime
they'll be volunteering unpaid volunteer
in through a sense and they do outreach
to they're benefiting the ethnic
minorities in a small village here and
they assured me because I talk to them
but you know well how far is this
village and the show am this village
it's real extreme poverty a lot of the
people don't don't wear shoes they go
barefoot that's a definite sign of
poverty so no no this is this is real
this is a real poverty-stricken village
and it's we talk about the ethnic
breakdown that more than one I think
minority here living in that village and
they're doing basically educational
outreach and I'm incredibly tempted to
get involved I'm in trade incredibly
tempted to commit my time and my money
but above all this emotional and
intellectual engagement with those
languages history politics having a deep
and meaningful engagement with the
context and their elements of risk
involved Mike humanitarian gagement in
Laos ended with people threatening to
kill me and me getting kicked out of the
country if I have a humanitarian
gagement here in China in some ways you
roll the dice right no matter how
politically correct you may be no matter
how harmless or in defense of your form
of charity as all political activism
entails a certain element of risk and
you know if you're doing it in a country
other than the one you were born into us
understand the nature of those risk too
so yes I am tempted but I'm sitting
there and telling them look these are my
options in life now I have a
four-year-old daughter I can't take the
same risks I did the 20 years ago I
can't you know I can't even risk my own
time the same way I did I mean I already
speak low shut up to a certain level
because I wouldn't allows for two and a
half years one of the major indigenous
minority languages here dehong die is
closely related to northern dialects of
lao like thi nghia i already speak
chinese at a certain level it's
incredibly tempting for me to commit to
this place go home the edge of the
myanmar myanmar you land border area
with the same zeal and same engagement
and it's tempting partly because it
gives me the opportunity to do good yes
but it's tempting because of who I can
become what I can learn from it the way
i'm going to i know i would transform
myself to that positive engagement all
right and in closing this look guys if
you don't know identify openly as a
nihilist as an historical nihilist and i
actually do not believe there is any
question of moral responsibility here
all of this stuff we're talking about is
completely in the optional category do i
feel some moral responsibility toward
the Kree in the aegean canada yes and
I'm from part of Canada with a Cree in
the Egypt and the og curry and the Soto
ornated some from Ontario originally yes
then I think there's some question of
moral responsibility that's your
government and your taxpayers dollars in
your history yes I do think I have a
moral responsibility to first nations of
Canada which I may be the only white
person ever met who took that seriously
very very few people seem to feel that
load again do I have any more
responsibility whatsoever to poverty
stricken people in northern Laos zero do
I have any moral responsibility worse
people of Cambodia zero charitable
engagement the nature of the beast is
you can only give because you have it in
you to give I don't think you can
approach these questions at all in terms
of a guilt trip or imagining that you
have to give that you have to intervene
because if you don't you will be more
reliever mess I don't think a painter
can sit down at a blank canvas and start
painting because he feels beholden to
the blank canvas because he's trying to
do justice to you know the inherent
injustice of leaving that canvas blank
all right I don't think a sculptor can
sit down with a rock and say he's got to
do justice to what this rocks inner
potential is or that he feels guilty to
leave this rock unbeautiful all right
there is a philosophical sense in which
you have to approach these problems
political problems as a blank canvas
that you're going to try to create
something beautiful of us right going to
a meeting whether it's the Green Party
or the Liberal Party and sitting down at
that boardroom table with those people
and looking around you think you're not
trying to make something out of nothing
man I mean it's cold it's cold
middle-aged is chilling you deal with
middle-aged people in middle-aged
politics this ain't like the first day
of high school this ain't like your
first day of class meeting a whole bunch
of funds nobody's there to be your
friend whether you're doing that at
Parliament provincial Parliament federal
or local city hall or local caucus of
some green party whoa you sit down and
you're going to feel the chill in the
room and if anything you have to get
yourself stoked up and motivated to see
this as positively as up on canvas I'm
going to sit down with a bunch of people
who don't give a damn about ecology who
don't give a damn balloon animal rights
who think that veganism is a crazy
extremist idea i'm going to start from
this blank canvas and i'm going to make
something beautiful out of this picture
it's a huge creative challenge even at
the level of the handshake and the aight
aight conversations you're going to have
those people over years to build
constituency to build credibility to
make something positive out of that
situation you are making something out
of nothing in its way it's more of an
art than people think yeah there is no
moral responsibility there's an artistic
challenge of looking at an inherently
meaningless cold cruel implacable world
stands in front of you like a blank
canvas and trying to make something
positive out of whatever materials
you've got to paint life of course not
everybody could change the world not
everybody can say can change themselves
and for me now just with the obligations
i had towards mountain dog
I can't look at that charity I met with
today I can't offer to do for them what
I would have done maybe 15 years ago I
can only give one I have it in me to
give I could only offer to change if I
can take on those changes I can only
offer to get engaged if I have the
capacity to take on that engagement